# Vertical Merger Notes

## Vertical Merger
- Parameters
	- Consider a simple model of vertical merger. Pre-merger, an upstream monopolist $U$ produces an intermediate good at constant marginal cost $c_U$ and chooses wholesale price $w$ at which to sell to a downstream monopolist $D$. $D$ produces a final good by buying the intermediate good at wholesale price $w$ and converting each unit of the intermediate good into one unit of the final good at constant marginal cost $c_D$ and sells to consumers at retail price $p$. $D$ faces downward-sloping demand $Q(p)$ and chooses $p$ to maximise profit $\pi_D=(p-w-c_D)Q(p)$. $U$ chooses $w$ to maximise profit $\pi_U=(w-c_U)Q(p)$ since demand for the intermediate good is derived from demand for the final good. $D$ and $U$ merge. Post-merger, the merged firm $I$ produces the final good at marginal cost $c_I=c_U+c_D$ and chooses retail price $p_I$ at which to sell to maximise profit $\pi_I=(p_I-c_I)Q(p_I)$.
- Analysis
	- Pre-merger, in the second stage subgame where $D$ chooses $p$ given $w$, $D$ chooses monopoly price and enjoys monopoly profit given marginal cost $w+c_D$, i.e. $p=p^M(w+c_D)\equiv\arg\max_p{(p-w-c_D)Q(p)}$ and $\pi_D=\pi^M(w+c_D)\equiv\max_p{(p-w-c_D)Q(p)}$. In the first stage where $U$ chooses $w$, given common knowledge of rationality and incentives, $U$ knows that $p=p^M(w+c_D)$ hence $U$'s maximisation problem is $\max_w(w-c_U)Q(p^M(w+c_D))$. At the subgame-perfect equilibrium, $w>c_U$ since $\pi_U\leq0$ otherwise.
	- Post-merger, at equilibrium, $I$ chooses monopoly price and enjoys monopoly profit given marginal cost $c_U+c_D$, i.e. $p_I=p^M(c_I)=p^M(c_U+c_D)\equiv\arg\max_p{(p-c_U-c_D)Q(p)}$ and $\pi_I=\pi^M(c_I)=\pi^M(c_U+c_D)\equiv\max_p{(p-c_U-c_D)Q(p)}$.
	- Supposing that marginal revenue is decreasing, an increase in marginal cost causes a decrease in profit-maximising quantity (where marginal revenue is equal to marginal cost) hence an increase in profit-maximising price (given downward-sloping demand). It follows that $p^M$ is an increasing function hence that $p_I=p^M(c_U+c_D)<p=p^M(w+c_D)$ and $Q(p_I)>Q(p)$.
	- Pre-merger, joint profit $\Pi=\pi_U+\pi_D=(p-w-c_D)Q(p)+(w-c_U)Q(p)=(p-c_U-c_D)Q(p)$. Post-merger, joint profit $\pi_I=\pi^M(c_U+c_D)\equiv\max_p{(p-c_U+c_D)Q(p)}>\Pi$ since $p_I\neq p$.
- Result (Profit)
	- Post-merger, compared to pre-merger, insiders' joint profit increases. Intuitively, this is because of the internalisation of negative externalities between firms due to merger. Pre-merger, the upstream firm imposes a negative externality on the downstream firm in choosing a high wholesale price since this causes an increase in the downstream firm's marginal cost hence a decrease in its profit. The downstream firm imposes a negative externality on the upstream firm in choosing a high retail price since this causes a decrease in demand for the final good hence a decrease in demand for the intermediate good and a decrease in the upstream firm's profit.
- Result (Welfare)
	- Post-merger, compared to pre-merger, consumer surplus increases because retail price decreases. Pre-merger, retail price is greater because of double marginalisation, whereby both the upstream firm and the downstream firm sell at positive margin. Post-merger, the upstream firm effectively "sells" to the downstream firm at marginal cost because of the internalisation of negative externalities.